[22.01] Add Migrating from uWSGI to Gunicorn and FastAPI document (#13480)
galaxyproject/galaxy: doc/source/admin/migrating_to_gunicorn.md

# Migrating from uWSGI to Gunicorn and FastAPI

## Why do we migrate away from uWSGI

Starting with Galaxy release 22.01 the default application webserver is [Gunicorn](https://gunicorn.org/), which replaces [uWSGI](https://uwsgi-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
We have made this move because uWSGI support for newer Python versions has been problematic and because
we have modernized the API portion of our backend. The Galaxy web application is now an ASGI application
driven by [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) and [Starlette](https://www.starlette.io/).

> This will enable numerous important features in the future that would not be possible (or more complicated to set up)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will enable numerous important features in the future that would not be possible (or would be more complicated to set up)
```

> otherwise. Importantly [FastAPI's documentation](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/tutorial/) is very good and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
otherwise. Importantly, [FastAPI's documentation](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/tutorial/) is very good and
```

should increase developer productivity.

> The main advantage for our Users today is that Galaxy hosts documentation for its API as an [OpenAPI](https://www.openapis.org/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main advantage for our users today is that Galaxy hosts documentation for its API as an [OpenAPI](https://www.openapis.org/)
```

document that is directly generated from Galaxy's source code, and so will never be out of date or differ

> from the actual Implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from the actual implementation.
```

Reviewer: (I assume the uppercase was not intentional here and in the previous case)

Note that not all API endpoints have been modernized as of yet, this is an ongoing process.

> To see the API documentation for your Galaxy server you can go to `<galaxy_url>/api/docs`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To see the API documentation for your Galaxy server you can go to `<galaxy_url>/api/docs`.
```

This doesn't seem to work on https://usegalaxy.org/api/docs . Needs to be configured somewhere? Proxy?

Author: usegalaxy isn't running Gunicorn yet

> Another immediate advantage is that all incoming Parameters are validated against a [Pydantic](https://pydantic-docs.helpmanual.io/) Schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another immediate advantage is that all incoming Parameters are validated against a [Pydantic](https://pydantic-docs.helpmanual.io/) schema.
```

> Another immediate advantage is that all incoming Parameters are validated against a [Pydantic](https://pydantic-docs.helpmanual.io/) schema.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another immediate advantage is that parameters to all incoming API requests are validated against a [Pydantic](https://pydantic-docs.helpmanual.io/) schema.
```

This will lead to fewer subtle bugs and make it easier to interface with Galaxy's API.

In the future we are going to use Websockets and asynchronous programming to increase the reactivity

> of history events in Galaxy. This would not be as simple under uWSGI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of the Galaxy user interface. This would not be as simple under uWSGI.
```

## How do I upgrade my instance to use Gunicorn

> If you are using `run.sh` to start Galaxy and have not set up job handling via uWSGI mules

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are using `run.sh` to start Galaxy and have not set up job handling via uWSGI mules,
```

you do not need to do anything to start Galaxy under Gunicorn.

> If you are using uwSGI mules please read the [Scaling and Load Balancing Documentation](scaling.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using uWSGI mules please read the [Scaling and Load Balancing Documentation](scaling.md).
```

> If you are using uWSGI mules please read the [Scaling and Load Balancing Documentation](scaling.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are using uWSGI mules, please read the [Scaling and Load Balancing documentation](scaling.md).
```

You will most likely want to set up the **Gunicorn + Webless** strategy.

If you are using an upstream proxy server such as NGINX or Apache and you've been

> using the the uWSGI protocol you need to replace `uwsgi_pass` and `mod_proxy_uwsgi`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using the uWSGI protocol, you need to replace `uwsgi_pass` and `mod_proxy_uwsgi`.
```

You can find detailed documentation in the [NGINX](nginx.md) and [Apache](apache.md)
documentation.

> If you are managing your Galaxy server via Ansible you can continue to run Galaxy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are managing your Galaxy server via Ansible, you can continue to run Galaxy
```

under uWSGI while we are working on updating the Ansible roles for installing Galaxy.
We will update instructions here and on the [Galaxy Training Network](https://training.galaxyproject.org/).

> If you are starting Web and Job Handlers using an external Process manager like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are starting Web and Job Handlers using an external process manager like
```

> systemd or supervisor please read the [Scaling and Load Balancing Documentation](scaling.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
systemd or supervisor, please read the [Scaling and Load Balancing documentation](scaling.md).
```

> As mentioned in the scaling documentation, you can use gravity to generate supervisor configuration files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned in the scaling documentation, you can use [gravity](https://github.com/galaxyproject/gravity) to generate supervisor configuration files
```

Should we link this? It's the first time it's mentioned on this page.

> As mentioned in the scaling documentation, you can use [gravity](https://github.com/galaxyproject/gravity) to generate supervisor configuration files

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In particular, you can use [gravity](https://github.com/galaxyproject/gravity) to generate supervisor configuration files
```
